{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18740\viewh11620\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 RMBL manual soil Temperature manual cleaning protocol\
updated by DSC 20140716; modified by DSC 20150109 to include some actual data description.\
\
The data are the following format: sensors in columns and time in rows.\
\
Description of the column headers:\
Year - Year of the measurement [1991-1999]\
Mon - Month of the measurement [1-12]\
DOY - Julien day of the measurement [1-365(6)]\
Hour - Hour of the measurement. NOTE: The hour convention is different than the original data files which used 1-24. This format uses 0-23. Thus, a measurement with timestamp DOY 5 - Hour 24 in the old convention is equal to DOY 26 - Hour 0 in this convention.\
Sensor names: [1-10] [A-C] [1-3]\
\'97 the first number is the plot number\
\'97 the letter is the zone within the plot\
\'97 the last number is the depth: 1 = 5 cm, 2 = 12 cm, 3 = 25 cm. This dataset contains only depth 12cm.\
\
\
The following criteria were used to determine which data to remove:\
\
1) Any value that fell obviously outside of the normal diel pattern. Typically this means a difference of > 7-8 degrees but depends on the pattern observed for each sensor. These points were identified by looking at one year of data together and I.D.ing the points that clearly stood apart from the general series.\
\
2) Values that were boarder-line outside the normal diel pattern were then checked for position in the time series. Timesteps that did not occur between their neighbors or at least near their neighboring time steps were considered erroneous. I.e., a +/- smooth pattern was expected from the 2-hour data. While is true that an animal could have caused an unusual value, for my work I consider this an anomaly. Also, short-lived storms could cause unusual patterns, but ping-pong temperature changes of > 7-8 degrees at 12cm depth over the course of a 4 hours is suspect.\
\
3) Drastic changes in the diel range were removed. This points to sensor calibration issues.\
\
\
The distributed file: RMBL_1991-1999_Tsoil_depth12cm_CLEAN_20140712.csv was generated in the following manner.\
\
The raw files used are\
TB109ALL.SYS\
TB243ALL.SYS\
TB270ALL.SYS\
TC120FIX.SYS\
TC121ALL.SYS\
TD130ALL.SYS\
TD229FIX.SYS\
TD306FIX.SYS\
TE032ALL.SYS\
TE159ALL.SYS\
TE186FIX.SYS\
TE195FIX.SYS\
TE228FIX.SYS\
TF080FIX.SYS\
TF177FIX.SYS\
TG139FIX.SYS\
TH057FIX.SYS\
TI115FIX.SYS\
TJ082FIX.SYS\
\
The code RMBL_temperature.r (version 20140712) in conjunction with the list of bad data points in RMBL_baddata.csv (version 20140712) was used to automatically combine files, remove bad data points, and determine the season start and end dates. This code generates RMBL_Tsoil_ALL_time_CLEAN20140712.csv in which I manually removed the 5cm and 25cm depths which are not cleaned.\
\
Visualization of the cleaned data occurring in the growing season can be seen in files called RMBL_YYYY_depth12cm_soiltemp_timeseries_20140712.pdf. These files are a generated in RMBL_temperature.r code. Black points are the raw data. Yellow points indicate the points used in the growing season. Red lines indicate the season start and end dates as determined via the ATWE method: the first and last day with a daily maximum temperature greater than 5 degrees C. The season start and end date were determined with the 5cm depth data unless that data was not available or erroneous.}